---
layout: post
title: "Patriotism Tour of the United States"
date: 2016-05-11 12:00:00
categories: misc
---

My trip with Wei Wei across the United States, from Nashville to Chicago to Toronto (to see how much better the United States is) to Montreal to our nation's capitol.

## Nashville

### Day 1: Bongo / Gumbo / Dunn Bro's

We left Atlanta at 6:00 am after an all-nighter of cleaning the apartment and packing. After 5 hours of sleep (and not 4, due to an unexpected change of timezone), we arrived in Nashville outside the state capitol building and were greeted with the sound of construction and the smell of non-electric cigarettes. We walked to the hostel, which someone else said looked sketchy from the outside but really wasn't, put our stuff in lockers, and went to walk around. We first stumbled into the Music City Center, which was having an expo for Car Washers, sponsored by the International Car Washing Association. It was like a comic convention but without costumes. We ended up getting lunch at Robert's Western World, notable for being in Aziz Ansari's Netflix show, "Master of None" (although unlike in the show, no one was dancing, but there were a few older folks listening to the live Elvis or Johnny Cash impersonator - not sure which one). We then walked around a bit, and ended up in the Johnny Cash museum Bongo Cafe, which was like every other coffee shop except Johnny Cash was everywhere. We then proceeded to take an elevator to an employees-only section and set off a fire alarm trying to get back to the main part.

After that, we went back to the hostel and I took a nap while Wei Wei called people and took care of stuff. I woke up and called my brother to wish him happy birthday. We then walked around a bunch. Nashville has a walking bridge across the Cumberland River which is really scenic; you can see the skyline, and it divides the tourist part from the heartland, so that Nashville's American values don't get too corrupted. Some students were filming a Flash remake, so one of them was running normally (Flash) while the other was running slowly. There was something to do with the Grammy organization (a country music show maybe) but we didn't go in. We then went to eat Gumbo and Catfish sliders at Bourbon Street Blues and Boogie Bar, where they had live Blues music. The Gumbo was delicious, and the Catfish bread was really good (Catfish itself wasn't too bad). I had the Big Easy IPA by Abita Brewing (out of Lousiana), which Wei Wei and I both liked, although it probably was too easy to drink for people on Beer Advocate to appreciate. After that we walked around some more and ended up skipping rocks and waving to people on a ship that kept going by, the General Jackson South-will-rise-again cruise ship. We were pretty tired from not having slept the night before, so we didn't go to the Burlesque show. We tried watching an episode of Evangelion but apparently I downloaded the version without any English translation, and although Wei Wei could translate parts (very surprising) it wasn't worth it and we just went to bed.

Oh yeah, Dunn Bro's was another coffee place we walked by. It wasn't notable except for the way it sounds like Bongo and Gumbo.

### Day 2: Nashville, a Bastion of Roman Intellectualism

After being pretty lame last night and going to bed at 10:00, I woke up at 7:30 am to some of the people sharing our hostel room packing up and leaving. There is a pretty big nightly turnover, it seems like most people just stay for a night or two. I didn't get to speak much to the people who were here before, but today two new people came, they were from Britain and apparently wanted to see some of the non-tourist destinations in the United States (they just came from Chicago). I realized they were from not-the-US because they used an adapter to plug their phones in. I told the guy all I know about Britain is that Leicester just won the Premier League and he gave me a feel like he's heard that a lot lately.

Once Wei Wei and I were completely out of bed around 9:00, we went for a walk-run around a part of Nashville that we didn't walk around yesterday. It turns out that the parts we walked around yesterday pretty much covered the interesting bits of the tourist locations, because everything on the other side of the river was pretty much an average suburban neighborhood. My personal impression yesterday was that people are really nice here, but I think that might just be people who are trying to sell me something. The bus drivers are really nice, though, except the one who didn't stop for us (although he probably just didn't see us).

After walk-running, we went to a convenience store and got some oatmeal, bananas and orange juice, which we had for breakfast. The hostel kitchen is on point. They have some pretty cool electric stoves and an elaborate washing station, plus free seasonings for people to use. After making and eating breakfast, including spilling some tea on the ground and smearing it around, we somehow ended up at the Parthenon, despite getting really confused. The Nashville city planners need to change the name of either the "Music City Center" or the "Music City Central" because one is a bus station and one is an expo center, and the people at the information desk in the expo center had no idea how to get on the number 10.

Once we actually got on a bus, we got cultured at the Parthenon, which is the only full-scale replica of the original Roman Parthenon outside of the Roman Parthenon, unless North Korea has one they haven't told anyone about. It was built for the Nashville Centennial celebration, which took place 101 years after the city's founding, and it was originally supposed to be torn down after 6 months, but almost a hundred years on it is still here. Wei Wei wanted to go there because of the Percy Jackson series. Some people who were throwing a frisbee outside it let us pet their dog and gave us some pointers on where to go next. Apparently Electric Avenue and Jimmy Kelly's steak house are good places to go.

Inside the Parthenon was a huge replica of the Athena Parthenos. There was also an art exhibit of paintings inspired by Grimm's fairy tales. After the Parthenon we walked around Centennial Park, where they had a pedal-swing, a real quality piece of engineering. Then we walked over to Vanderbilt to see the Student Life Center and some other stuff. We picked up some stuff up from Kroger's to make [mom's spaghetti](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=SW-BU6keEUw) tomorrow for lunch, and came back and got dinner at B.B. King's, which had some really good Blue's music. The drumming was like it was from Whiplash. The guitarist was Grammy-nominated, too.
