---
layout: post
title: "Coding the Viterbi Algorithm in Numpy"
date: 2020-03-15 12:00:00
category: 🔨
excerpt: >
  A demo of how to code the Viterbi algorithm in Numpy.
katex: true
---

This tutorial explains how to code the Viterbi algorithm in Numpy, and gives a minor explanation. I'm using Numpy version `1.18.1` and Python `3.7`, although this should work for any future Python or Numpy versions.

# Resources

The Viterbi algorithm has been widely covered in many areas. One of my favorite explanations is from the Youtuber [Mathematical Monk][mathematical-monk]. This tutorial expects some background familiarity with hidden Markov models; if you've never heard of them, check out those videos! The [Wikipedia][wikipedia] page is also pretty good.

# Problem Statement

The goal of the Viterbi algorithm is to compute the most probable sequence of hidden states $$z^*$$ for a Hidden Markov Model defined by an input sequence $$x$$ and a sequence of hidden states $$z$$:

$$z^* = \underset{z}{\mathrm{argmin}}[p(z|x)]$$

$$z^* = \underset{z}{\mathrm{argmin}}[p(z,x)]$$

We assume that we know the input sequence $$x = (x_1, ..., x_n)$$, the set of initial hidden probabilities $$z_1 = (z_1^1, ..., z_1^L)$$, the emission probabilities $$p(x_i \| z_j)$$ and the transition probabilities $$p(z_i \| z_{i-1})$$. In Numpy, these can be represented as arrays:

{% highlight python %}
import numpy as np
from typing import List, Optional, Tuple

num_hidden_states = 3
num_observed_states = 2
num_time_steps = 4

# Initializes the transition probability matrix.
transition_probs = np.array([
    [0.1, 0.2, 0.7],
    [0.1, 0.1, 0.8],
    [0.5, 0.4, 0.1],
])
assert transition_probs.shape == (num_hidden_states, num_hidden_states)
assert transition_probs.sum(1).mean() == 1

# Initializes the emission probability matrix.
emission_probs = np.array([
    [0.1, 0.9],
    [0.3, 0.7],
    [0.5, 0.5],
])
assert emission_probs.shape == (num_hidden_states, num_observed_states)
assert emission_probs.sum(1).mean()

# Initalizes the initial hidden probabilities.
init_hidden_probs = np.array([0.1, 0.3, 0.6])
assert init_hidden_probs.shape == (num_hidden_states,)

# Defines the sequence of observed states.
observed_states = [1, 1, 0, 1]
assert len(observed_states) == num_time_steps

# Placeholder defining how we'll call the Viterbi algorithm.
max_seq, seq_prob = viterbi(
    transition_probs,
    emission_probs,
    init_hidden_probs,
    observed_states,
)
# max_seq: [2, 0, 2, 0]
# seq_prob: 0.0212625
{% endhighlight %}

Note that these matrices represent the probability distributions in *column-major* format, meaning that the column dimension sums to 1. Note also that if we represent the hidden state probabilities as a vector, then doing vector-matrix multiplication into the `transition_probs` matrix will give us the new hidden states, and doing vector-matrix multiplication into the `emission_probs` matrix will give us the observed states.

# Maximizing Value

The maximum value of $$p(z, x)$$ for all the inputs $$1, ..., k$$ is

$$\mu_k(z_k) = \max_{z_{1:k-1}} p(z_{1:k}, x_{1:k})$$

$$\mu_k(z_k) = \max_{z_{1:k-1}} p(x_k|z_k) p(z_k|z_{k-1}) p(z_{1:k-1}, x_{1:k-1})$$

$$\mu_k(z_k) = \max_{z_{k-1}} p(x_k|z_k) p(z_k|z_{k-1}) \max_{z_{1:k-2}} p(z_{1:k-1},x_{1:k-1})$$

Since the first two terms aren't dependent on anything besides $$z_{k-1}$$, you can take them out of the whole max operation.

$$\mu_k(z_k) = p(x_k|z_k) \max_{z_{k-1}} p(z_k|z_{k-1}) \mu_{k-1}(z_{k-1})$$

For the recursion base case, we get

$$\mu_1(z_1) = p(z_1, x_1)$$

$$\mu_1(z_1) = p(z_1) p(x_1 | z_1)$$

Knowing the maximizing value, we can find the *argmax* by using *backpointers* - for some max value $$\mu_k(z_k)$$, we get the incoming index as the $$arg \max_{z_{k-1}} p(z_k \| z_{k-1}) \mu_{k-1}(z_{k-1})$$. By doing this recursively, we can get the (reversed) sequence of indices that led to the final maximum value.

{% highlight python %}
def step(mu_prev: np.ndarray,
         emission_probs: np.ndarray,
         transition_probs: np.ndarray,
         input_state: int) -> Tuple[np.ndarray, np.ndarray]:
    """Runs one step of the Viterbi algorithm.
    
    Args:
        mu_prev: probability distribution with shape (num_hidden),
            the previous mu
        emission_probs: the emission probability matrix (num_hidden,
            num_input)
        transition_probs: the transition probability matrix, with
            shape (num_hidden, hidden)
        input_state: the observed input state at the current step
    
    Returns:
        - the mu for the next step
        - the maximizing previous state, before the current state,
          as an int array with shape (num_hidden)
    """
    
    pre_max = mu_prev * transition_probs.T
    max_prev_states = np.argmax(pre_max, axis=1)
    max_vals = pre_max[np.arange(len(max_prev_states)), max_prev_states]
    mu_new = max_vals * emission_probs[:, input_state]
    
    return mu_new, max_prev_states


def viterbi(emission_probs: np.ndarray,
            transition_probs: np.ndarray,
            start_probs: np.ndarray,
            input_states: List[int]) -> List[int]:
    """Runs the Viterbi algorithm to get the most likely state sequence.
    
    Args:
        emission_probs: the emission probability matrix (num_hidden,
            num_input)
        transition_probs: the transition probability matrix, with
            shape (num_hidden, num_hidden)
        start_probs: the initial probabilies for each state, with shape
            (num_hidden)
        input_states: the observed input states at each step
    
    Returns:
        - the most likely series of states
        - the joint probability of that series of states and the input
    """
    
    # Runs the forward pass, storing the most likely previous state.
    mu = start_probs * emission_probs[:, input_states[0]]
    all_prev_states = []
    for input_state in input_states[1:]:
        mu, prevs = step(mu, emission_probs, transition_probs, input_state)
        all_prev_states.append(prevs)
    
    # Traces backwards to get the maximum likelihood sequence.
    state = np.argmax(mu)
    sequence_prob = mu[state]
    state_sequence = [state]
    for prev_states in all_prev_states[::-1]:
        state = prev_states[state]
        state_sequence.append(state)
    
    return state_sequence[::-1], sequence_prob
{% endhighlight %}

# Complexity

The **time complexity** of the whole inference is $$O(N M^2)$$ for $$N$$ time steps and $$M$$ input states (although the $$M^2$$ term represents a matrix-matrix multiplication, which Numpy helps accelerate using [BLAS][blas-wikipedia]). The **space complexity** is $$O(N M)$$, since we have to store the most likely previous state for each time step.

[mathematical-monk]: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=RwwfUICZLsA&list=PLD0F06AA0D2E8FFBA&index=105
[wikipedia]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Viterbi_algorithm
[blas-wikipedia]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Basic_Linear_Algebra_Subprograms
