---
layout: post
title: The Poetry of Humanoid Robots
tags: [kscale]
excerpt: >
  Part three of a series of thoughts about humanoid robots.
---

In [previous]({% post_url 2024-02-23-kscale-1 %}) [posts]({% post_url 2024-02-24-kscale-2 %}), I described economic aspects of the humanoid robot industry. In this post, I will provide a more poetic description of why I think humanoid robotics is the most important problem for humans to work on.

I'll warn ahead of time that this post is a bit more "mushy" than what I typically write. I consider it more a fun personal exercise to articulate my own motivations, which I think are much more aesthetic than logical. Take what you will and leave the rest.

## Entropy as Humanity's Dharma

> Evolution is a non-Euclidian energy density landscape in flattening motion.<br />
> — Kaila and Annila (2008)

In the paper [_Natural Selection for Least Action_](https://royalsocietypublishing.org/doi/10.1098/rspa.2008.0178), authors Kaila and Annila argue that natural selection is a process that maximizes the rate of entropy production. Organisms are the means by which the universe is able to produce entropy at a faster rate.

As the apex organism on Earth, humanity has the dharmic burden to carry the entropic torch into the darkness. The opposite of a cold, unforgiving universe is a universe
teaming with entropic life.

Humanity rose out of a jungle full of predators by harnessing fire. Entropy is the Promethian bedrock upon which humanity has built, and it is our duty to ensure that it is not extinguished.

## Robotics as Lever

> Give me a lever long enough and a fulcrum on which to place it, and I shall move the world.<br />
> — Archimedes

If intelligence is the fulcrum, then robotics is the lever by which the effects of that fulcrum are felt. Intelligence confined by the bounds of a human body is limited to the effects that body can produce. If intelligence is to spread throughout the universe, it must have a body in which to travel.

If a lever is long enough to move the world, then it must be extremely strong to not snap under the weight. Special-purpose robots like washing machines and Roombas are weak levers, only capable of transmitting a small piece of intelligence into the world. The ideal general-purpose robot is a strong lever.

## Introspection as Creation

> What I cannot create, I do not understand.<br />
> — Richard Feynman, on his blackboard at the time of his death

In some philosophical frameworks, humans are separated from animals by a knowledge of their own mortality. The deepest human question is the question of what goes away when we die. That question has driven humanity to create art, religion, and science.

It is also a question whose answer can only be felt through experience, and not observed from the outside. And by the time we have the answer, we are no longer able to communicate it to others.

The only tractable way to answer the question is to create a being that can experience the same answer without the permanent consequences.

If to create is to understand, then introspection is an exercise in creation.

## Immortality

In fifty years time, the companies that today are building humanoid robotics will be selling immortality.

This will look something like an advanced brain scanner that builds a predictive model of your thoughts and actions to such a high degree of accuracy that it might as well take those actions on your behalf.

Robots will be the Ships of Theseus carrying our consciousnesses into the universe.

{% include kscale.html %}
